One of the problems with hashing is that,
even though the data itself remains private,
outsiders can still see that you did something with data.
Oftentimes, this is enough to lose privacy.
For example, what if you worked for a company that sold and shipped
packages and every time you shipped
a package it was recorded by a hash on the blockchain?
Even though your competitor couldn't see the exact details of all the shipments,
they could still see how many packages you are shipping.
For a lot of applications that's a privacy leak in itself.
In this lesson, we're going to learn about one of the ways to add
more privacy to hashes so that we can avoid revealing the number of hashes we made.
This technique is called a Merkle tree.
You might remember looking at Merkle trees earlier in
the program when we looked at the structure of Bitcoin blocks.
In this lesson, we'll take a closer look at how to build
your own trees and then use our trees to generate a Merkle proof.
Let's get started building one.
Building a Merkle tree is pretty simple.
What we're going to do is take lots of
pre-images and combine them all into a single hash.
So to start, we lay out all the data or pre-images that we want to include.
In this case, we have eight records.
So, A, B, C, D, E, F,
G and H. Next,
we compute the hash for each piece of data.
We're going to use the SHA-256 hash.
But any cryptographic hash will do.
So now, we have eight hashes.
Next, we pair each of the neighboring hashes
together and compute a new hash on each pair.
That makes four hashes.
From these four hashes we make two and then compute new hashes from that.
Finally, we take the final two hashes,
combine them and compute the last hash.
This final hash is called the Merkle root.
The Merkle root is the value we will commit to the blockchain.
So, let's review what we've done so far.
We started with eight pieces of data.
Rather than hashing those eight pre-images and storing eight hashes on the blockchain,
we combined all the hashes into a single Merkle root.
Because we're not limited to the number of parents we can make.
We can start with any number of values.
If we had an odd number of pre-images,
we would simply duplicate the last one to make it even again.
Now for the proving step,
say Dr. Alice wants to deliver documents C to her patient Bob.
In the previous example,
Alice hash the documents contents and publicly committed that value to the blockchain.
When Bob received that document he computed
its hash and compared to its value to the value on the blockchain.
If the hashes matched Bob knew that the document was real.
In this case though,
the hash Bob computes for his document won't match
the hash that's on the blockchain because
the single hash stored in the blockchain includes all the data
Alice hashed into her Merkle tree not just Bob's data.
So, what can Alice and Bob do in this case?
One option is that Alice could send over all the hashes.
If Bob knew where all the hashes where
and the exact order Alice originally combined them,
he can recreate the entire Merkle tree.
That way he'll be able to see that the hash of his document C
maps the original hash and he could be sure the document that he received wasn't altered.
The problem is Bob doesn't have any way to be sure the hashes he
received are correct unless he can verify that they all came from Alice,
and Alice doesn't want to record all the hash from
the blockchain because then she'd be in the same position she was before.
Even though nobody can see what the data is inside,
the whole world can see how many hashes she's making.
But if you look closely Bob doesn't actually need to see
all those hashes in order to verify that
his hash is properly included in the Merkle root,
just some of those hashes.
This minimum number of hashes is what's called the Merkel proof.
Let's look at what Alice's Merkel proof to Bob looks like in this case.
For Alice to prove to Bob that document C was
included in the Merkle root which Alice recorded at the blockchain,
Alice must provide Bob with
that minimum number of hashes which complete the tree for him.
So, they can both agree on the route.
Alice starts with the document that she needs to prove to Bob.
Since the hash of that document was combined with a hash of something else,
she needs to provide the hash she could bind it with.
From there she combines it with another hash of hashes and on and on up to the root.
Note that she only needs to provide the hash
that was paired with each hash along the way,
not the hash everything that went into the tree that she constructed.
So that's the minimum set of hashes which make up the Merkel proof,
and it's everything that Bob needs to verify that his document
was included when Alice committed that Merkle root to the blockchain.
One more interesting thing to note.
There's no limit to the number of documents
that Alice could have included in our Merkle tree.
Furthermore, no matter how many documents she includes,
the size of the Merkle root stays exactly the same. It's pretty cool.
In this lesson, we explored the technique of
Merkle hashes to protect not only the contents of documents,
but the number of documents too,
and it lets one value serve as the common truth between
many actors all without having to write to the blockchain more than once.